In its most basic sense, information is an interpretable sequence of symbols. Information  arises from the interpretation of an ordered sequence of symbols by some agent using a decoding procedure. Decoding procedures involve the parsing of the sequence of symbols and subsequent assignment of meaning. _True information_ arises when agent correctly interprets the sequence of symbols. _Partial information_ arises when the agent correctly interprets a part of the message. _Misinformation_ arises when the agent incorrectly interprets any part of the message. Finally, _disinformation_ arises when the agent correctly interprets any part of the message, but the premise of the message is false or deceiving.

_Informational entities_ are those entities that contain information. These exist independently of any particular physical manifestation, although there must have been at least one manifestation (a physical embodiment in the past or present). _Information content entities_ are informational entities that can be _concretized_ as characteristics (e.g. ink pattern, electromagnetic pattern, neuronal pattern) of physical entities (e.g. a page, a hard drive, a brain). We say that different concretizations contain the same information when their interpretation yields identical conclusions.

_Specifications_ are _information content entities_ that specify a sequence of actions. These include protocols that specify instructions or procedures which result in some expected outcome. When specifications are interpreted by agents, they become actionable entities (aka realizable entities such as ideas, plans, emotions) which can be shared by one or more agents.  Actionable entities may be realized as actions (parts of a process). If the process consists of all specified actions, then the process satisfies the specification.


_Formalizing sentences_
A _textual entity_ such as a _document_ or a _report_ may _contain_ one or more _sentence\_s expressed a series of interpretable_character\_s. A _proposition_ is a _sentence_ that expresses something that is _true_ or _false_, and these may be _represented_ as a _statement_ in some logic-based language such as first order logic or OWL.