#summary Ontology Design Pattern: Scientific Investigation
#sidebar SIOSideBar
=Investigation=
An [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000747 investigation] is a procedure that aims to uncover facts about an object of study. A scientific investigation (experiment or study) aims to provide facts to support or dispute a well formulated hypothesis.  Investigations _usually_ involve:

 * the development of a research [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000076 plan] including, but not limited to:
  * the formulation of a [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000284 hypothesis]
  * the formulation of aims and [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000337 objectives] 
  * the formulation of a [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_001041 study design]
 * the execution of the investigation including, but not limited to: 
  * the [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_001049 selection, preparation or collection] of [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_001050 sample(s)]
  * the [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_001052 collection of data] through observation or [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_001007 assay] 
  * the [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_001051 analysis] of [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000089 data]
  * the preparation of an investigational [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_001026 report]

*Hypotheses* and *objectives* are, initially, all descriptions of _possible_ or _desired_ outcomes.  Descriptions usually provide information about an entity and may be [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000341 manifested] in a number of forms, such as [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000651 text], [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000605 sound] or [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_001059 physical gestures]. A description may [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000563 describe] an entity (e.g. a hypothesis might describe a specific kind of biological process), whereas an [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000091 effective specification] such as a [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_001043 protocol] or [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000076 plan] may [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000338 specify] a process in which the proposed set of actions are to be executed. 

An investigation initially [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000628 refers to] an associated hypothesis, but may later, indirectly through the generated data, provide [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000772 evidence for] the hypothesis, including [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000206 supporting], [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000207 disputing], or [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000774 refuting] evidence. Similarly, an objective is a key attribute of an investigation, but becomes [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000356 realized in] that process _if_ it becomes fulfilled. Since a study design acts a guide to executing the investigation, the study design [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000563 describes] the investigation, and if followed exactly, the investigation [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000339 is specified by] the study design.

An investigation is related to its activity parts through [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000053 'has proper part'] relation, and activities, being processes themselves, can be temporally ordered (occurs before / after) with the [http://semanticscience.org/resource/SIO_000248 'precedes'] relation. 