#summary Ontology Design Pattern: Provenance
#labels draft,SIO,ODP
#sidebar SIOSideBar
Provenance refers to the chronology of an object, including the circumstances around its origin (creation/discovery) and subsequent spatial movement and transfer of ownership.

A [http://www.w3.org/2011/01/prov-wg-charter W3C working group] was formed to provide a specification for the representation of provenance in RDF/OWL.  The proposed model involves 3 types (Entity, Activity and Agent) and 7 relations (!WasDerivedFrom, !WasGeneratedBy, !WasAssociatedWith, !WasAttributedTo, !WasInformedBy, Used and !ActedOnBehalfOf). The main use cases that are presented include: Generation, Usage, Communication, Invalidation, Derivation, Revision, Quotation and Influence. Let us go through these and provide the SIO representation.

===Process-Based Provenance===
Creation ([http://semanticscience.org/resource/creation sio:creation]) is the process by which an entity comes into existence, destruction ([http://semanticscience.org/resource/Destruction sio:destruction]) is the process by which an entity ceases to exist, and modification ([http://semanticscience.org/resource/modification sio:modification]) is the process by which an entity is modified (gains/loses parts, qualities, roles, dispositions, functions, etc) but retains its identity. Entities that are _used_ as input are specified with 'has input' ([http://semanticscience.org/resource/has-input sio:has-input]), entities that are consumed (or are sufficiently changed that they lose their canonical identity) as a result of participation are specified with 'has substrate' ([http://semanticscience.org/resource/has-substrate sio:has-substrate]), while entities that are modified but retain their identity are specified with 'has target' [http://semanticscience.org/resource/has-target sio:has-target]).  New entities are specified with 'has product' ([http://semanticscience.org/resource/has-product sio:has-product]). Agents that direct, actively participate in the creation of the object, but are not consumed may be specified with ([http://semanticscience.org/resource/has-agent sio:has-agent]). The space and time of processes can be specified with 'is located in' ([http://semanticscience.org/resource/is-located-in sio:is-located in]) and 'exists at' ([http://semanticscience.org/resource/exists-at sio:exists-at]), where time instants can be specified as an exact xsd:dateTime or time intervals as a datatype range to specify the start and end date and times e.g. (>= dateTime && <= dateTime). 

{{{
'creation', 'destruction', 'modification'
subClassOf
 'process'
 and 'has agent' some Entity
 and 'has input' some Entity
 and 'has substrate' some Entity
 and 'has product' some Entity
 and 'is located in' some Entity
 and 'exists at' some ('time interval' and 'has value' some xsd:dateTime)
}}}

===Object-Level Provenance===
SIO offers several relations to specify the provenance relationship _among_ objects. In the first case, we consider objects that were created by, is being provided by or have been obtained from a source.

'has source' / 'is source of' : to specify _an_ origin of the object
'has creator' / 'is created by' : to specify the agent responsible for bringing the object into existence
'has provider' / 'is provided by' : to specify the agent that provided the object
'derives from' / 'derived into' : to specify the object(s) from which this object was created from/with

informational objects
'has version' / 'is version of' : to specify the object for which this is based on
'is prior version of' / 'is subsequent version of' : to specify the version order
